Moved technical details of Jobs implementation out of How To docs (#4500)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/developing-applications/building-blocks/jobs/jobs-features-concepts.md

---
type: docs
title: "Features and concepts"
linkTitle: "Features and concepts"
weight: 2000
description: "Learn more about the Dapr Jobs features and concepts"
---

> Now that you've learned about the [jobs building block]({{< ref jobs-overview.md >}}) at a high level, let's deep dive 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you've learned about the [jobs API building block]({{< ref jobs-overview.md >}}), let's dive 
```

Author: I'm inclined to argue that we shouldn't be calling it the Jobs API building block (though it's called this in other existing Jobs documentation and on other concepts as well). I'd like to make the case for cleanly separating the two.

We have a Jobs building block and we have a Jobs API, but the API isn't the building block nor vice versa. The building block is the conceptual idea of the scheduling orchestrator and explains how the block is available for other capabilities to be built atop of (e.g. actor reminders and workflow timers), but the API describes the actual interfaces used for application development. The building blocks each have an API, but the API is a distinct thing from the conceptual blocks themselves.

They're distinct when we talk about Bindings:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4a62d453-767a-41e0-8f70-2d77475d3812)

...and Workflows:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c0ba0b50-36c8-4170-a135-8d35b93757ea)

...and Cryptography:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9e542f3f-c911-4da2-9b7b-50463bba7620)

And then the other building blocks appear to confuse the two.

Reviewer: @msfussell what do you think?

Reviewer: @WhitWaldo this is fine by me - we can change later if necessary!

> into the features and concepts included with the Dapr Jobs engine and SDKs. Dapr Jobs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
into the features and concepts included with the Dapr Scheduler service and SDKs. Dapr Jobs:
```

Author: The Scheduler service is an internal implementation detail. While it's an integral part of the Jobs capability, is that something we want to get into in a document that's sharing information about the publicly facing aspects of the Jobs functionality (which may be less subject to change than the internal bits)?

Reviewer: @WhitWaldo "jobs engine" is not a term used in the user-facing docs, while "Scheduler service" is clearly defined in the docs. If "Scheduler service" does not apply here, you'll need to think of another term without introducing a new one.

Author: I was following the language style used in the [Workflow architecture](https://docs.dapr.io/developing-applications/building-blocks/workflow/workflow-architecture/) that uses "engine" all over the place.

If "engine" isn't preferred here, how about just "into the features and concepts included in Dapr Jobs and the various SDKs."

Reviewer: Workflow engine has been defined in the docs, while this would be the first time we refer to anything called a jobs engine. Let's just call it Dapr jobs for now!

- Provides a robust and scalable API for scheduling operations to be triggered in the future.

> - Exposes several core capabilities which are common across all supported languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Exposes several capabilities which are common across all supported languages.
```

> which are common across all supported languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
type: docs
title: "Features and concepts"
linkTitle: "Features and concepts"
weight: 2000
description: "Learn more about the Dapr Jobs features and concepts"
---

Now that you've learned about the [jobs building block]({{< ref jobs-overview.md >}}) at a high level, let's deep dive 

> into the features and concepts included with the Dapr Jobs engine and SDKs. Dapr Jobs exposes several core capabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
into the features and concepts included with the Dapr Jobs engine and SDKs. Dapr Jobs:
- Provides a robust and scalable API for scheduling operations to be triggered in the future.
- Exposes several core capabilities which are common across all supported languages.
```

which are common across all supported languages.

> ## Jobs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Dapr Jobs provide a robust and highly-scalable API for scheduling operations to be triggered in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Job identity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Job identity
```

All jobs are registered with a case-sensitive job name. These names are intended to be unique across all services 
interfacing with the Dapr runtime. The name is used as an identifier when creating and modifying the job as well as 
to indicate which job a triggered invocation is associated with.

Only one job can be associated with a name at any given time. Any attempt to create a new job using the same name
as an existing job will result in an overwrite of this existing job.

> ### Scheduling Jobs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scheduling Jobs
```

A job can be scheduled using any of the following mechanisms:

> - Intervals using Cron expressions, duration values or period expressions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Intervals using Cron expressions, duration values, or period expressions
```

- Specific dates and times

> Note that for all time-based schedules, if a timestamp is provided with a timezone via the RFC3339 specification, that 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For all time-based schedules, if a timestamp is provided with a time zone via the RFC3339 specification, that 
```

> timezone will be used instead, but when not provided, the time will be assumed to be the timezone used by the server 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time zone is used. When not provided, the time zone used by the server running Dapr is used. 
```

> running Dapr. In other words, do **not** assume that times will run in UTC unless you've specified this when scheduling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, do **not** assume that times run in UTC time zone, unless otherwise specified when scheduling
```

the job.

> #### Schedule using a Cron expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Schedule using a Cron expression
```

> When using a Cron expression to schedule a job to execute on a specific interval, the expression is written using 6

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When scheduling a job to execute on a specific interval using a Cron expression, the expression is written using 6
```

fields spanning the values specified in the table below:

| seconds | minutes | hours | day of month | month | day of week |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| 0-59 | 0-59 | 0-23 | 1-31 | 1-12/jan-dec | 0-6/sun-sat |

> ##### Example 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example 1
```

> "0 30 * * * *" will trigger every hour on the half-hour mark

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`"0 30 * * * *"` triggers every hour on the half-hour mark.
```

> ##### Example 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example 2
```

> "0 15 3 * * *" will trigger every day at 03:15

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`"0 15 3 * * *"` triggers every day at 03:15.
```

Can we clarify somewhere in the Cron expressions section what `*` means?

> #### Schedule using a duration value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Schedule using a duration value
```

> This reflects use of a Go duration string documented [here](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) in which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can schedule jobs using [a Go duration string](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration), in which
```

> a string consists of a possibly signed sequence of decimal numbers, each with an optional fraction and a unit suffix. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a string consists of a (possibly) signed sequence of decimal numbers, each with an optional fraction and a unit suffix. 
```

> Valid time units are "ns", "us", "ms", "s", "m" or "h".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Valid time units are `"ns"`, `"us"`, `"ms"`, `"s"`, `"m"`, or `"h"`.
```

> ##### Example 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example 1
```

> "2h45m" will trigger every two hours and 45 minutes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`"2h45m"` triggers every 2 hours and 45 minutes.
```

> ##### Example 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example 2
```

> "37m25s" will trigger every 37 minutes and 25 seconds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`"37m25s"` triggers every 37 minutes and 25 seconds.
```

> #### Schedule using a period expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Schedule using a period expression
```

> The following period expressions are supported. Note that the "@every" expression also accepts a Go duration string

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following period expressions are supported. The "@every" expression also accepts a [Go duration string](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration).
```

> as documented above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

| Entry | Description | Equivalent Cron expression |
| -- | -- | -- |
| @every | Run every (e.g. "@every 1h30m") | N/A |
| @yearly (or @annually) | Run once a year, midnight, January 1st | 0 0 0 1 1 * |
| @monthly | Run once a month, midnight, first of month | 0 0 0 1 * * |
| @weekly | Run once a week, midnight on Sunday | 0 0 0 * * 0 |
| @daily or @midnight | Run once a day at midnight | 0 0 0 * * * |
| @hourly | Run once an hour at the beginning of the hour | 0 0 * * * * |

> #### Schedule using a specific date/time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Schedule using a specific date/time
```

> A Job can also be scheduled to run at a particular point in time by providing a date that's specified using the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A job can also be scheduled to run at a particular point in time by providing a date using the 
```

[RFC3339 specification](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3339).

> ##### Example 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example 1
```

> "2025-12-09T16:09:53+00:00" Indicates that the job should be run on December 9, 2025 at 4:09:53 PM UTC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`"2025-12-09T16:09:53+00:00"` Indicates that the job should be run on December 9, 2025 at 4:09:53 PM UTC.
```

> ### Scheduled triggers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scheduled triggers
```

> When a scheduled Dapr Job is triggered, the runtime sends a message back to the service that scheduled the job using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a scheduled Dapr job is triggered, the runtime sends a message back to the service that scheduled the job using
```

either the HTTP or gRPC approach, depending on which is registered with Dapr when the service starts.

> #### gRPC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### gRPC
```

When a job reaches its scheduled trigger time, the triggered job is sent back to the application via the following
callback function:

> *Note: The following example is in Go but applies to any programming language with gRPC support.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The following example is in Go, but applies to any programming language with gRPC support.
```

```go
import rtv1 "github.com/dapr/dapr/pkg/proto/runtime/v1"
...
func (s *JobService) OnJobEventAlpha1(ctx context.Context, in *rtv1.JobEventRequest) (*rtv1.JobEventResponse, error) {
    // Handle the triggered job
}
```

This function processes the triggered jobs within the context of your gRPC server. When you set up the server, ensure that

> you register the callback server, which will invoke this function when a job is triggered:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you register the callback server, which invokes this function when a job is triggered:
```

```go
...
js := &JobService{}
rtv1.RegisterAppCallbackAlphaServer(server, js)
```

In this setup, you have full control over how triggered jobs are received and processed, as they are routed directly
through this gRPC method.

> #### HTTP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### HTTP
```
```suggestion
### HTTP
```

> If a gRPC server isn't registered with Dapr when the application starts up, Dapr will instead trigger jobs by making a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a gRPC server isn't registered with Dapr when the application starts up, Dapr instead triggers jobs by making a 
```

> POST request to the endpoint `/job/<job-name>`. The body will include the following information about the job:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
POST request to the endpoint `/job/<job-name>`. The body includes the following information about the job:
```

> - Schedule: When the job triggers occur

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Schedule`: When the job triggers occur
```

> - RepeatCount: An optional value indicating how often the job should repeat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `RepeatCount`: An optional value indicating how often the job should repeat
```

> - DueTime: An optional point in time representing either the one time when the job should execute (if not recurring)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DueTime`: An optional point in time representing either the one time when the job should execute (if not recurring) or the start join from which the schedule should take effect
```

> or the start join from which the schedule should take effect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Reworded this for better clarity

> - Ttl: An optional value indicating when the job should expire

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Ttl`: An optional value indicating when the job should expire
```

> - Payload: A collection of bytes containing data originally stored when the job was scheduled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Payload`: A collection of bytes containing data originally stored when the job was scheduled
```

> The DueTime and Ttl fields will reflect an RC3339 timestamp value reflective of the timezone provided when the job was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DueTime` and `Ttl` fields will reflect an RC3339 timestamp value reflective of the time zone provided when the job was
```

> originally scheduled. If no timezone was provided, these values will indicate the timezone used by the server running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
originally scheduled. If no time zone was provided, these values indicate the time zone used by the server running
```
